where I was book editor for a number of years.
How does your wife feel about a house growing?
Well, you know what it is.
It's wonderful because she shares the passion and that's the most dangerous part.
We'll go to these book fairs and we'll see something which is hopelessly expensive but we'll agree that we can't survive without it.
And when you get that kind of a situation,
um but it's you know i couldn't i couldn't imagine being without them i mean they they really are companions and uh we did it we did add a room to the house a couple of years ago i don't know i don't know that i can ever get through uh a day without
browsing among them.
Do you have an agenda, or is it serendipitous each day?
Of course, I have to write books to keep going, and I want to write books, so it isn't completely serendipitous, but I try every day, no matter how tired I am or how quiet I am, to just go and sort of muse among my own shelves and pick up things that I've read and haven't seen for years.
Do you get chills when you pick up something that's particularly exciting or something beautiful?
It's amazing, isn't it?
I don't know, for a lot of complex family reasons, which I won't go into, I'll ever be able to afford to retire from teaching.
I'm not even sure that I ever should retire from teaching.
At least so long as both my body and mind are sound enough to keep going and that there are still students who want to hear me.
Because...
I have a kind of religious sense of what the teaching of literature is.
And it seems to me that after my generation, that there will still be some good people teaching, we're not really going to be replaced.
Do you feel that there are any books at all that deserve oblivion?
Oh, sure.
I mean, there are canonical works.
and they have very special and fascinating problems.
Thus, my dear fellow, I would vote, and I'm in print of saying this, in an excited great fury among the partisans of Edgar Allan Poe.
I have written about Poe in the New York Review of Books and in a modern critical edition of, you know, Modern Critical Views, where I had a long introduction on Poe.
Edgar Allan Poe is an author, one cannot get out of the canon.
He's an immensely popular writer.
And I suppose partly because as a myth maker, he is indisputable, but he's an abominable writer, an absolutely abominable writer.
There isn't a poem by him that isn't a disaster, even the very best of them.
And the prose is, whether it's argumentative prose, critical prose, or narrative prose, is unbelievably bad.
He's stylistically a monster.
It's amazing.
He's a terribly bad writer, but he is undeniably canonical.
I mean, there aren't that many cases.
That's amazing.
One of my interests in books, but I will always buy books, 19th century books, early 20th century books, that comment upon literature of the time.
I'm always interested in contemporary evaluations.
I came across a book, which is, I think it's 1876 or something like that, maybe even a little later,
Oh, it's much later than that.
It's about 1888 or whatever.
I'm looking for it now as we speak.
And it's about great American writers.
And nowhere do you see a mention of Melville.
I mean, Melville was totally forgotten and abandoned.
Melville was revived by Raymond Weaver.
It must have been around 1920, though I may get the date a little bit.
I mean, they discovered that the stuff.
But it was Raymond Weaver in a book called Herman Melville, Mystic and Mariner, who revived Melville.
Perhaps it was earlier than 1920.
I may have the date wrong.
No, I think it is because they discovered Billy Budd about 1922 in those papers there.
Yeah, that's quite true.
But, you know, it fascinates me that my secret favorite among all 20th century American poets, or indeed poets anywhere, Hart Crane, from the time he was terribly young, and he was born in 1899, and his first poems are about 1918 or 1919.
Of course, he dies of us at the age of 32 when he committed suicide in 1932.
But Crane is obsessed with Melville from the beginning.
I've often thought about trying to write an essay just as a comparative thing, if only because I have all of her works, because I love the lithographs of Childe Hassam, is Celia Faxter.
Now there's a woman who was so popular in her lifetime, and she's a contemporary of Emily Dickinson's, and they were both corresponding with the same editors, and Dickinson couldn't get a damn poem published in the magazine.
They thought she was nuts.
Here's Thaxter, the darling, and she had the salon on the island off the coast of Maine, and she's an amusing woman.
Well, the phenomenon of popular authors who become period pieces is a very fascinating one.
And of course, a great many of the figures whom I've left out of that contemporary list of the canon
are people who I'm convinced are just going to be period pieces.
How do you feel about, you know, I love the Library of America.
I love the whole concept of it, and I love the books.
It was founded by and is run by my closest friend, Richard Fourier.
How do you feel about this?
I mean, because that is the selection.
You do decide what works belong in the American canon here, and I guess by extension you decide which ones don't.
I myself, though, I'm allowed to make suggestions since I'm one of their advisors.
That was a generic you, by the way.
How does one feel about it?
Well...
I mean, there are clearly a few authors there who are there, you know, for cultural reasons, let us say.
And there are many authors who are there for historical reasons, General Grant, General Sherman, and so on and so forth.
That's wonderful.
I don't want to take up too much of your time.
You're being very generous with it as we're going.
But I do love your statement that if you have to pick books, I mean, you take a complete Shakespeare and a Bible, and then after that it gets tricky.
It does get very tricky indeed.
Somebody asked me the other day, I don't think it was a journalist, just a friend, said, Harold, what would you really take as a third book?
And I rooted about it.
I said, well, certainly Shakespeare, if I can only have one.
And certainly a King James Bible, if I could only have two.
But boy, the third would be hard.
Be very hard.
I guess, probably in the end, I would take Cervantes.
I would take Don Quixote, because it would be very hard to do without a copy of it.
I'm not quite sure.
Well, you'd take Cervantes over Dante.
Sorry to put you in the spot here.
I wouldn't claim, I really do feel that Shakespeare's only possible rival, and he doesn't quite match Shakespeare, even Joyce admitted that in Western literature since the ancient world, is Dante.
Dante.
You're agonizing over this, I can see it.
What a great, harsh poem.
It scares the life out of me.
It fascinates me.
I intend to go on reading it until I die.
I intend to go on learning from it until I die.
I don't love it.
I don't love it the way I love Cervantes.
It fascinates me endlessly.
I just got a review copy of a book from Yale, as a matter of fact, on Tyndale.
Have you seen that on the Tyndale Bible?
No, no.
I have the Yale editions of the Tyndale Old Testament and New Testament.
And I knew that there was a new study.
It looks wonderful.
It just came in a couple days ago.
Who is the author?
Daniel, D-A-N-I-E-L-L.
He is the fellow who edits.
That's correct, yeah.
And it's a Yale book, and I just got a review copy of it, and I was so impressed I got it in my bibliography because it is an interesting, you know, this is a book that was fatal to its author.
And there's a wonderful book, which I have right here, as a matter of fact.
It's an English book.
And the title of it is Books Fatal to Their Authors by P.H.
Ditchfield.
Have you ever heard of this book?
No.
And it's...
This is one of these.
My bibliography is very interesting, by the way, because it's largely made up of books that I acquired in the hundreds just to do this research.
I will insist upon Glenn giving me a copy of your book the minute it's out.
Well, I will insist upon that, and I'll make sure you get one.
Professor, I'm not going to take up any more of your time.
You've been very generous with it.
As a special favor, this all interests me very much, and when your column is done,
When it appears, wherever, could you send me a copy of it?
If you give me your address, I'd be pleased.
My best mailing address, and I'd like to stay in touch anyway, is 179 Linden, L-I-N-D-E-N, 179 Linden Street, New Haven, Connecticut.
06511.
I've got it.
This will be soon.
This will be within the next two weeks.
Good fortune to you, sir.
Thank you, sir.
It's been a great pleasure.
Take care.